README.md, before:

# Holiday Budget Tracker

## Intro

For my third portfolio project, I created an app to track the budget and spending for a user's holiday. 

![Screenshot of welcome page of Holiday Budget Tracker]()

Visit the deployed site here: [Holiday Budget Tracker]()
View Holiday Budget Tracker on [Github](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker)

![GitHub last commit]()![GitHub language count]()![GitHub top language]()![W3C Validation]()


---

## CONTENTS

* [User Experience](#user-experience-ux)
  * [User Stories](#user-stories)

* [Design](#design)
  * [Planning](#planning)
    * [Flowchart](#flowchart)
    * [Google API Setup](#google-api-setup)
    * [Google Sheets](#google-sheets)
 
* [Features](#features)
  * 
  * [Future Implementations](#future-implementations)
  * [Accessibility](#accessibility)

* [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
  * [Languages Used](#languages-used)
  * [Frameworks, Libraries & Programs Used](#frameworks-libraries--programs-used)

* [Deployment & Local Development](#deployment--local-development)
  * [Creating a New Repository](#creating-a-new-repository)
  * [Activating the Google Drive & Sheets API](#activating-the-google-drive--sheets-api)
  * [Setting up the Gitpod Workspace for the APIs](#setting-up-the-gitpod-workspace-for-the-apis)
  * [Initial Code for connecting to our API with Python](#initial-code-for-connecting-to-our-api-with-python)
  * [Deploying to Heroku](#deploying-to-heroku)
  * [How to Fork](#forking-the-github-repository)
  * [How to Clone](#clone-this-github-repository)

* [Testing](#testing)
  * [Functionality](#functionality)
  * [Browser Compatibility](#browser-compatibility)
  * [Responsiveness](#responsiveness)
  * [Code Validation](#code-validation)
  * [Solved Bugs](#solved-bugs)

* [Credits](#credits)
  * [Code Used](#code-used)
  * [Content](#content)
  * [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

---

## User Experience (UX)

### User Stories

As a user, I want to:

* Have an app that I can use to track my holiday spending
* Keep track of my spending and budget
* Be able to create my own budgets
* Be able to navigate through the app easily
* Be alerted to any error I may have made in input and instructed how to try again

#### First-time Visitor Goals

I want to: 
* Understand the purpose of the app
* Start the app with minimal instruction
* Navigate the site easily
* Have a smooth experience in creating/viewing a budget and entering expenses

#### Returning/ Frequent Visitor Goals

I want to: 
* Easily access budget information
* See a budget breakdown
* Enter new expenses to a chosen budget


## Design

### Planning

#### Flowchart

Before starting to code, I designed a flowchart with [Lucid](www.lucid.app) to visualise how a user would move through the app and to break down exactly what needed to be done.

![Flowchart](/documentation/pp3-flow-chart.png)

#### Google API Setup

#### Google Sheets


## Features




### Future Implementations


### Accessibility


## Technologies Used

### Languages Used



### Frameworks, Libraries & Programs Used

Git - For version control.

Github - To save and store the files for the website.

Gitpod - For developing the site.

[Shields.io](https://shields.io/) for adding badges to the readme.

[Beautifier.io](https://beautifier.io/) to format the site's code.


##  Deployment & Local Development    
  
The below steps to creating and setting up a new Python workspace and API credentials has been guided by and adapted from the [Code Institute's](https://codeinstitute.net/ie/) Python walkthrough project 'Love Sandwiches'. Please check each step is relevant to your project needs and change the data entered to suit it.

### Creating a new repository 
<details open>
<summary>Steps to create a new repository.</summary>  

The [Code Institute's Python Essential Template](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Org/python-essentials-template) was used to create a terminal for my Python file to generate it's output. To use this template, please follow these steps:
1. Log in to [GitHub](https://github.com/) or create a new account.
2. Navigate to the above Python template repository.
3. Click '**Use this template**' -> '**Create a new repository**'.
4. Choose a new repository name and click '**Create repository from template**'.
5. In your new repository space, click the green '**Gitpod**' button to generate a new workspace.   

</details> 
  
-----  

### Activating the Google Drive & Sheets API
<details>
<summary>Steps to activate the APIs</summary>
To access the data in a Google Sheets worksheet using Python code, an API is required. Please follow these steps to set up your APIs:  

1. Navigate to the [Google Cloud Platform](https://cloud.google.com), using an email address/Google account that is registered to you alone.
2. In the Google Cloud Platform Dashboard, create a new project by clicking on the '**Select a Project**' button and choosing the '**New Project**' option. Give your new project a name and click '**Create**'. (Your access credentials are unique to each project, so create a new project for every project that you build.) 
3. Click '**Select Project**' in the blue banner to bring you to your project page.
4. Select '**APIs and Services**' from the left side menu, then select '**Library**'.
5. Use the search bar to search for the two APIs needed for this project, Google Drive API and Google Sheets API. One at time, choose the APIs from the search and click '**Enable**' on their main page. Follow the below steps for the Google Drive API, but only click '**Enable**' for the Google Sheets API. There is no need to download credentials again for it.
6. On the API overview page, click '**Create Credentials**' to generate some credentials which will allow us access to our Google Drive from our Python code.
7. Fill out the forms fields and dropdown menus with the information that is relevant to your project. For mine, I chose **Google Drive API -> Application Data -> No, I'm not using them** (regarding using Kubernetes, App Engine etc)
8. Under Service Account Details, choose a Service Account name and click '**Create**'.
9. In the Role Dropdown box choose **Basic -> Editor** then press '**Continue**'. Click '**Done**' to finish the form if you do not need to grant users access to the service account if it is a personal project.
10. On the next page, click on your new Service Account that has been created, then click on the '**Keys**' tab to '**Add Key**'. Select '**Create New Key**'.
11. Select JSON and '**Create**'. Your json file containing your API credentials will be downloaded to your machine.

</details>

-----  

### Setting up the Gitpod workspace for the APIs
<details>
<summary>Steps for workspace setup</summary>
  
1. In the new Gitpod workspace you've created with the Python Essentials template, click and drag the json file that you created in the above steps, into the Gitpod workspace.  
2. Rename it to `CREDS.json`, if you wish, and open the file. Find the client_email address you previously entered, copy it without the quotes around it.
3. In the Google Sheets file that you have created for this project, click the '**Share**' button and paste the email address into the field, choose '**Editor**', untick '**Notify People**' and click '**Share**'. This allows our project access to the spreadsheet.
4. To ensure the private credentials that you have created do not make their way to the cloud for others to view, add the `creds.json` file to your `gitignore` file before you commit any changes to your repository, and push them to the cloud.
5. Use the command `git status` to check that the `creds.json` file is not staged to be committed.

</details>  
  
-----  

### Initial Code for connecting to our API with Python
<details>
<summary>Steps to including the Python/API connection code</summary>

1. The code needed to ensure your APIs connect correctly can be found at the top of the `run.py` file connected to this project. It is important that you remember to pass the exact same name as your spreadsheet to the `SHEET = GSPREAD_CLIENT.opn('your-filename-here')` code, or else gspread will throw an error.
2. The command `pip3 install gspread google-auth` is needed to install the gspread package for handling the worksheet data and the google-auth package to allow access to the Google Sheets account via the Credentials we downloaded earlier. Use the above command in the Gitbash terminal to install.
3. Please refer to the `run.py` file for the import, SCOPE, CREDS, SCOPED CREDS, GSPREAD CLIENT, SHEET code that is needed to connect the APIs and change any data that is personal to your project.

</details>
  
-----  

### Deploying to Heroku  

Heroku has been used to deploy this project as Python is used as a back-end language. To allow for accurate testing, I deployed the project to Heroku early on using Automatic Deployment to update the program everytime new code was pushed to my GitHub repository. Here are the steps that I followed to set my project up, guidance was provided by the [Code Institute's](https://codeinstitute.net/ie/) 'Love Sandwiches' project.     

1. Log in to [Heroku](https://id.heroku.com/login) or create an account if you are a new user.
2. Once logged in, in the Heroku Dashboard, navigate to the '**New**' button in the top, right corner, and select '**Create New App**'.
<details>
<summary>Create new app</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_1.png">
</details>  

3. Enter an app name and choose your region. Click '**Create App**'.
<details>
<summary>Enter app name</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_2.png">
</details>  
  
4. In the Deploy tab, click on the '**Settings**', reach the '**Config Vars**' section and click on '**Reveal Config Vars**'. Here you will enter KEY:VALUE pairs for the app to run successfully. In KEY enter `CREDS`, in VALUE, paste in the text content of your `CREDS.json` file. Select '**Add**'.  
5. Repeat this process with a KEY:VALUE pair of `PORT` and `8000`.
6. In the Settings tab, in the Buildpack section, click '**Add Buildpack**', located near the bottom, right of the refreshed screen. One at a time, choose the '**Python**' pack, save changes, then choose the '**NodeJS**' buildpack and save changes. **NB: the Python buildpack _must_ be above the NodeJS buildpack.**
  
<details>
<summary>Choose Buildpacks</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_bp.png">
</details>  
  
7. Go to the '**Deploy**' tab and choose GitHub as the Deployment method.
8. Search for the repository name, select the branch that you would like to build from, and connect it via the '**Connect**' button.
9. Choose from '**Automatic**' or '**Manual**' deployment options, I chose the 'Automatic' deployment method. Click '**Deploy Branch**'.
10. Once the waiting period for the app to build has finished, click the '**View**' link to bring you to your newly deployed site.

  
-----  

### Forking the GitHub Repository

A copy of the original repository can be made through GitHub. Please follow the below steps to fork this repository:  

1. Navigate to GitHub and log in.  
2. Once logged in, navigate to this repository using this link [Holiday Budget Tracker Repository](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker).
3. Above the repository file section and to the top, right of the page is the '**Fork**' button, click on this to make a fork of this repository.
4. You should now have access to a forked copy of this repository in your Github account.

-----  

### Clone this GitHub Repository

A local clone of this repository can be made on GitHub. Please follow the below steps:

1. Navigate to GitHub and log in.
2. The [Holiday Budget Tracker Repositiory](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker) can be found at this location.
3. Above the repository file section, locate the '**Code**' button.
4. Click on this button and choose your clone method from HTTPS, SSH or GitHub CLI, copy the URL to your clipboard by clicking the '**Copy**' button.
5. Open your Git Bash Terminal.
6. Change the current working directory to the location you want the cloned directory to be made.
7. Type `git clone` and paste in the copied URL from step 4.
8. Press '**Enter**' for the local clone to be created.

## Testing

### Functionality




### Browser Compatibility

The website was tested on:
* Chrome
* Edge
* Safari
* Firefox
* Chrome for Android

### Responsiveness

The site was tested on the following devices: 
* Samsung S9
* Samsung Galaxy S22
* Google Pixel 6
* iPad Pro 2020
* 15.6" Laptop
* Desktop PC


### Code Validation

The code was validated using PEP8 standards to ensure readability and maintainability.

![Python pass]()


### Solved Bugs

|Bug|Solution|Fixed?|
|-----|-----|-----|
|Title and ID of worksheet being printed out rather than just the name| Use selected_budget.title rather than selected_budget | Yes| 
|If user doesn't enter a name for the budget, it is saved as blank rather than 'Unnamed'| ? | No |
|Screen not clearing after user presses Enter if error message has displayed| ? | No |



## Credits

### Code Used

[Amy Richardson's README](https://github.com/kera-cudmore/Bully-Book-Club/tree/main) for examples of what to include in the README sections.

Code Institute 'Love Sandwiches' walkthrough project.

Code Institute's sample README for ideas of what to put in each section.
 
### Content

  
### Acknowledgments

* My mentor Brian Macharia for his help and clear explanations of what needed to be done
* Amy Richardson for facilitating our weekly standups and being a font of information and encouragement
* My friends and family for testing the project on their devices and offering words of encouragement

Commit message:

Upload manual testing png to readme and update testing section

README.md, after:

# Holiday Budget Tracker

## Intro

For my third portfolio project, I created an app to track the budget and spending for a user's holiday. 

![Screenshot of welcome page of Holiday Budget Tracker]()

Visit the deployed site here: [Holiday Budget Tracker]()
View Holiday Budget Tracker on [Github](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker)

![GitHub last commit]()![GitHub language count]()![GitHub top language]()![W3C Validation]()


---

## CONTENTS

* [User Experience](#user-experience-ux)
  * [User Stories](#user-stories)

* [Design](#design)
  * [Planning](#planning)
    * [Flowchart](#flowchart)
    * [Google API Setup](#google-api-setup)
    * [Google Sheets](#google-sheets)
 
* [Features](#features)
  * 
  * [Future Implementations](#future-implementations)
  * [Accessibility](#accessibility)

* [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
  * [Languages Used](#languages-used)
  * [Frameworks, Libraries & Programs Used](#frameworks-libraries--programs-used)

* [Deployment & Local Development](#deployment--local-development)
  * [Creating a New Repository](#creating-a-new-repository)
  * [Activating the Google Drive & Sheets API](#activating-the-google-drive--sheets-api)
  * [Setting up the Gitpod Workspace for the APIs](#setting-up-the-gitpod-workspace-for-the-apis)
  * [Initial Code for connecting to our API with Python](#initial-code-for-connecting-to-our-api-with-python)
  * [Deploying to Heroku](#deploying-to-heroku)
  * [How to Fork](#forking-the-github-repository)
  * [How to Clone](#clone-this-github-repository)

* [Testing](#testing)
  * [Functionality](#functionality)
  * [Browser Compatibility](#browser-compatibility)
  * [Responsiveness](#responsiveness)
  * [Code Validation](#code-validation)
  * [Solved Bugs](#solved-bugs)

* [Credits](#credits)
  * [Code Used](#code-used)
  * [Content](#content)
  * [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

---

## User Experience (UX)

### User Stories

As a user, I want to:

* Have an app that I can use to track my holiday spending
* Keep track of my spending and budget
* Be able to create my own budgets
* Be able to navigate through the app easily
* Be alerted to any error I may have made in input and instructed how to try again

#### First-time Visitor Goals

I want to: 
* Understand the purpose of the app
* Start the app with minimal instruction
* Navigate the site easily
* Have a smooth experience in creating/viewing a budget and entering expenses

#### Returning/ Frequent Visitor Goals

I want to: 
* Easily access budget information
* See a budget breakdown
* Enter new expenses to a chosen budget


## Design

### Planning

#### Flowchart

Before starting to code, I designed a flowchart with [Lucid](www.lucid.app) to visualise how a user would move through the app and to break down exactly what needed to be done.

![Flowchart](/documentation/pp3-flow-chart.png)

#### Google API Setup

#### Google Sheets


## Features




### Future Implementations


### Accessibility


## Technologies Used

### Languages Used



### Frameworks, Libraries & Programs Used

Git - For version control.

Github - To save and store the files for the website.

Gitpod - For developing the site.

[Shields.io](https://shields.io/) for adding badges to the readme.

[Beautifier.io](https://beautifier.io/) to format the site's code.


##  Deployment & Local Development    
  
The below steps to creating and setting up a new Python workspace and API credentials has been guided by and adapted from the [Code Institute's](https://codeinstitute.net/ie/) Python walkthrough project 'Love Sandwiches'. Please check each step is relevant to your project needs and change the data entered to suit it.

### Creating a new repository 
<details open>
<summary>Steps to create a new repository.</summary>  

The [Code Institute's Python Essential Template](https://github.com/Code-Institute-Org/python-essentials-template) was used to create a terminal for my Python file to generate it's output. To use this template, please follow these steps:
1. Log in to [GitHub](https://github.com/) or create a new account.
2. Navigate to the above Python template repository.
3. Click '**Use this template**' -> '**Create a new repository**'.
4. Choose a new repository name and click '**Create repository from template**'.
5. In your new repository space, click the green '**Gitpod**' button to generate a new workspace.   

</details> 
  
-----  

### Activating the Google Drive & Sheets API
<details>
<summary>Steps to activate the APIs</summary>
To access the data in a Google Sheets worksheet using Python code, an API is required. Please follow these steps to set up your APIs:  

1. Navigate to the [Google Cloud Platform](https://cloud.google.com), using an email address/Google account that is registered to you alone.
2. In the Google Cloud Platform Dashboard, create a new project by clicking on the '**Select a Project**' button and choosing the '**New Project**' option. Give your new project a name and click '**Create**'. (Your access credentials are unique to each project, so create a new project for every project that you build.) 
3. Click '**Select Project**' in the blue banner to bring you to your project page.
4. Select '**APIs and Services**' from the left side menu, then select '**Library**'.
5. Use the search bar to search for the two APIs needed for this project, Google Drive API and Google Sheets API. One at time, choose the APIs from the search and click '**Enable**' on their main page. Follow the below steps for the Google Drive API, but only click '**Enable**' for the Google Sheets API. There is no need to download credentials again for it.
6. On the API overview page, click '**Create Credentials**' to generate some credentials which will allow us access to our Google Drive from our Python code.
7. Fill out the forms fields and dropdown menus with the information that is relevant to your project. For mine, I chose **Google Drive API -> Application Data -> No, I'm not using them** (regarding using Kubernetes, App Engine etc)
8. Under Service Account Details, choose a Service Account name and click '**Create**'.
9. In the Role Dropdown box choose **Basic -> Editor** then press '**Continue**'. Click '**Done**' to finish the form if you do not need to grant users access to the service account if it is a personal project.
10. On the next page, click on your new Service Account that has been created, then click on the '**Keys**' tab to '**Add Key**'. Select '**Create New Key**'.
11. Select JSON and '**Create**'. Your json file containing your API credentials will be downloaded to your machine.

</details>

-----  

### Setting up the Gitpod workspace for the APIs
<details>
<summary>Steps for workspace setup</summary>
  
1. In the new Gitpod workspace you've created with the Python Essentials template, click and drag the json file that you created in the above steps, into the Gitpod workspace.  
2. Rename it to `CREDS.json`, if you wish, and open the file. Find the client_email address you previously entered, copy it without the quotes around it.
3. In the Google Sheets file that you have created for this project, click the '**Share**' button and paste the email address into the field, choose '**Editor**', untick '**Notify People**' and click '**Share**'. This allows our project access to the spreadsheet.
4. To ensure the private credentials that you have created do not make their way to the cloud for others to view, add the `creds.json` file to your `gitignore` file before you commit any changes to your repository, and push them to the cloud.
5. Use the command `git status` to check that the `creds.json` file is not staged to be committed.

</details>  
  
-----  

### Initial Code for connecting to our API with Python
<details>
<summary>Steps to including the Python/API connection code</summary>

1. The code needed to ensure your APIs connect correctly can be found at the top of the `run.py` file connected to this project. It is important that you remember to pass the exact same name as your spreadsheet to the `SHEET = GSPREAD_CLIENT.opn('your-filename-here')` code, or else gspread will throw an error.
2. The command `pip3 install gspread google-auth` is needed to install the gspread package for handling the worksheet data and the google-auth package to allow access to the Google Sheets account via the Credentials we downloaded earlier. Use the above command in the Gitbash terminal to install.
3. Please refer to the `run.py` file for the import, SCOPE, CREDS, SCOPED CREDS, GSPREAD CLIENT, SHEET code that is needed to connect the APIs and change any data that is personal to your project.

</details>
  
-----  

### Deploying to Heroku  

Heroku has been used to deploy this project as Python is used as a back-end language. To allow for accurate testing, I deployed the project to Heroku early on using Automatic Deployment to update the program everytime new code was pushed to my GitHub repository. Here are the steps that I followed to set my project up, guidance was provided by the [Code Institute's](https://codeinstitute.net/ie/) 'Love Sandwiches' project.     

1. Log in to [Heroku](https://id.heroku.com/login) or create an account if you are a new user.
2. Once logged in, in the Heroku Dashboard, navigate to the '**New**' button in the top, right corner, and select '**Create New App**'.
<details>
<summary>Create new app</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_1.png">
</details>  

3. Enter an app name and choose your region. Click '**Create App**'.
<details>
<summary>Enter app name</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_2.png">
</details>  
  
4. In the Deploy tab, click on the '**Settings**', reach the '**Config Vars**' section and click on '**Reveal Config Vars**'. Here you will enter KEY:VALUE pairs for the app to run successfully. In KEY enter `CREDS`, in VALUE, paste in the text content of your `CREDS.json` file. Select '**Add**'.  
5. Repeat this process with a KEY:VALUE pair of `PORT` and `8000`.
6. In the Settings tab, in the Buildpack section, click '**Add Buildpack**', located near the bottom, right of the refreshed screen. One at a time, choose the '**Python**' pack, save changes, then choose the '**NodeJS**' buildpack and save changes. **NB: the Python buildpack _must_ be above the NodeJS buildpack.**
  
<details>
<summary>Choose Buildpacks</summary>
<img src ="documentation/readme/heroku_bp.png">
</details>  
  
7. Go to the '**Deploy**' tab and choose GitHub as the Deployment method.
8. Search for the repository name, select the branch that you would like to build from, and connect it via the '**Connect**' button.
9. Choose from '**Automatic**' or '**Manual**' deployment options, I chose the 'Automatic' deployment method. Click '**Deploy Branch**'.
10. Once the waiting period for the app to build has finished, click the '**View**' link to bring you to your newly deployed site.

  
-----  

### Forking the GitHub Repository

A copy of the original repository can be made through GitHub. Please follow the below steps to fork this repository:  

1. Navigate to GitHub and log in.  
2. Once logged in, navigate to this repository using this link [Holiday Budget Tracker Repository](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker).
3. Above the repository file section and to the top, right of the page is the '**Fork**' button, click on this to make a fork of this repository.
4. You should now have access to a forked copy of this repository in your Github account.

-----  

### Clone this GitHub Repository

A local clone of this repository can be made on GitHub. Please follow the below steps:

1. Navigate to GitHub and log in.
2. The [Holiday Budget Tracker Repositiory](https://github.com/EJFleet/pp3_holiday_budget_tracker) can be found at this location.
3. Above the repository file section, locate the '**Code**' button.
4. Click on this button and choose your clone method from HTTPS, SSH or GitHub CLI, copy the URL to your clipboard by clicking the '**Copy**' button.
5. Open your Git Bash Terminal.
6. Change the current working directory to the location you want the cloned directory to be made.
7. Type `git clone` and paste in the copied URL from step 4.
8. Press '**Enter**' for the local clone to be created.

## Testing

### Functionality

Extensive testing was performed to ensure that the program ran correctly.

#### Manual Testing

![Manual Testing Checklist](/documentation/testing/pp3-holiday-budget-tracker-manual-testing.png)


### Browser Compatibility

The website was tested on:
* Chrome
* Edge
* Safari
* Firefox
* Chrome for Android

### Responsiveness

The site was tested on the following devices: 
* Samsung S9
* Samsung Galaxy S22
* Google Pixel 6
* iPad Pro 2020
* 15.6" Laptop
* Desktop PC


### Code Validation

The code was validated using PEP8 standards to ensure readability and maintainability.

![Python pass]()


### Solved Bugs

|Bug|Solution|Fixed?|
|-----|-----|-----|
|Title and ID of worksheet being printed out rather than just the name| Use selected_budget.title rather than selected_budget | Yes| 
|If user doesn't enter a name for the budget, it is saved as blank rather than 'Unnamed'| ? | No |
|Screen not clearing after user presses Enter if error message has displayed| ? | No |



## Credits

### Code Used

[Amy Richardson's README](https://github.com/kera-cudmore/Bully-Book-Club/tree/main) for examples of what to include in the README sections.

Code Institute 'Love Sandwiches' walkthrough project.

Code Institute's sample README for ideas of what to put in each section.
 
### Content

  
### Acknowledgments

* My mentor Brian Macharia for his help and clear explanations of what needed to be done
* Amy Richardson for facilitating our weekly standups and being a font of information and encouragement
* My friends and family for testing the project on their devices and offering words of encouragement
